Hello, my name is Elena Shpak. I am the head of the Department for Selecting Personnel in the Industry and Sales, HR of Human Capital.
Today I want to share my experience on how to conduct an interview, how to find out the candidate in an hour or an hour and a half, how to get reliable information about him and draw a conclusion.
I will try to offer you an algorithm for solving the task of selection and evaluation.
Of course, this is not a dogma. All people are different, and in order to become a professional in this field, of course, you need to learn, collect new technologies and find your own way.
Nevertheless, certain patterns and methods exist here. Our department will be dedicated to selecting and evaluating personnel by linear managers, because all the responsibility for selecting personnel lies on these specialists.
How to find out the candidate in an hour and a half?
As a rule, an interview is conducted at the level of common sense, and it seems that this is quite enough. But do you know what percentage of information we get in words or text?
Only 7%. 93% is intonation, movement, gesticulation, facial expressions, emotional coloring of what a person says.
Do you know what percentage of accuracy in an interview, when we conduct at the level of intuition?
So, only 7% to 15% if we are talking about a biographical interview, when the candidate is simply asked to tell about himself, and we just listen.
Behavioral interview, when we ask the candidate to tell about what really happened and how he did it, only 65%.
Assessment center, when for two or three days the candidate is forced to solve different tasks and tested on professional and personal qualities, is only 70% accuracy.
100% is not given by any technology. We know that, as a rule, an average recruiter gives an assessment at the intuitive level. So, usually, in one case out of three, this intuition and assessment are absolutely incorrect.
The cost of replacing one incorrectly selected employee is one year's salary, a whole year's salary. If we are talking about a top manager, then, according to various estimates, such losses of companies can amount to up to three years' salaries.
Interesting numbers. The first selection of specialists occurs after the assessment of their CV. Do you know how many candidates provide their CV with, to put it mildly, distorted information?
So, from 60 to 90% of candidates complete their salary in their CV. More than 65 candidates report incorrect information about their education in their CV.
And from 40 to 60% of candidates report incorrect information about their work. So, on the basis of the accuracy of the information we receive, we allow ourselves to conduct an incorrect interview.
Before we stop at the signs and consequences of an incorrect interview, I want to give one more interesting number. When we hire an employee, in 80% of cases we hire him because of his professional knowledge, skills and skills.
But when we fire an employee, in 85% of cases we fire him because of his work. What is a poorly conducted interview and what are its consequences? The main and most unbearable consequence is the loss of good candidates. Today, the market is full of specialists, and this is simply an unacceptable luxury.
The second point is the poor and incomprehensible feedback on the candidate. If the candidate is good, then his feedback is dazzling and does not say anything. If he is bad, then to say that he does not suit us and I feel this at the level of chemistry is categorically wrong.
In this case, neither the HR nor the internal staff know how to continue the search. The search is simply by touch. Naturally, this leads to a delay in time, financial and time losses. The situation in the department, where the vacancies are still not closed, is also not very good. People work with overload. It is not possible to create a normal working environment.
The consequences of a poorly conducted interview are also the lack of management of the candidate's expectations. There are two aspects. The first aspect is when a person who did not get into the company for work has high expectations. When does this happen?
When instead of an interview, he is given a trusting conversation. The interviewer, the line manager, usually and the candidate simply talk about business, about life, share some impressions. The line manager talks about tasks. At the same time, he reveals certain know-how, some technologies and some completely unnecessary things to a stranger.
The candidate thinks that he has already been accepted. After that, they say to him, sorry, you do not suit us. What happens? Disappointment, resentment, bewilderment. These emotions are taken to the market by the candidate. This certainly spoils the reputation of the company.
The second moment is when the candidate is given a promise at the interview stage, but the candidate still becomes an employee. I want to assure you that everything that the line manager says to the candidate at the interview, the candidate will remember.
And in just a little time, maybe half a year, maybe a little more, the candidate will come and ask, you promised me that in half a year my salary will be indexed. Or you promised me that in a year I will become the manager. You will have to somehow explain to him what it was just to get him into the company.
Another very important point. We are talking about the disadvantages of an interview in a macro sense. When the image is lost, when candidates bring bad information to the market. There is also a moment of an incorrectly conducted interview, directly related to the technology of conducting the interview.
First of all, it is a long time. It is believed that it is normal to conduct an interview for an hour. If we are talking about high positions, then, of course, this time is not enough. And it can be an hour and a half. But you need to remember that after an hour and a half, the interview becomes viscous. People get tired, attention is dulled, and the conversation becomes practically nothing. No new information appears.
The second point. When the interviewer does not take the initiative in his own hands and, as it were, lets go of the interview process. He sits and just waits for the candidate to tell what interests the interviewer. And the candidate is passionate about telling what he knows or wants to tell. It is completely incomprehensible why conduct such an interview.
I want to draw your attention to the fact that any interview should be structured and thought out in advance. You need to understand exactly why we asked a question and how we interpret the answer. Otherwise, everything becomes uninteresting.
The form of the interview also seriously affects the quality of the candidate's assessment. In this case, there are two mistakes. The first is an interview interrogation. When the interviewer asks questions to the candidate in a rigid, non-emotional form. Of course, the candidate is stressed and closes. It is almost impossible to get any reliable information.
And the other side of the coin. When the interview turns into a sale. The interviewer, instead of assessing and understanding the candidate, tries to sell the vacancy. He tries to tell as much as possible about the company, the business, the work, and so on. And to keep silent about the shortcomings. This is also completely wrong.
Another mistake is the interviewer's personality. The interviewer, like any living person, is influenced by external factors. For example, by the charm of the personality, by the influence of the brand. It seems to us that if a person came from a large, well-known brand company, then he must have some special knowledge and technologies.
And in the interview, instead of learning about a person's real experience and finding out why he leaves such a company, the interviewer simply talks to him and exchanges impressions. In addition, the interviewer, of course, relies on his life experience. He is trapped in stereotypes and his past knowledge.
Traditionally, it is believed that technologists are calm, reasonable and structured people. And as soon as we see in the resume that such an education is written and a person has been engaged in technology for many years, it seems to us that he should be just like that. But technologists, as well as lawyers or philologists, can be completely different. And unstructured and emotional.
But the most important mistakes that emerge during the interview are still embedded before the meeting with the candidates. These mistakes are associated, first, with the assessment of the requirements for the candidate we want to find and with the mistakes in the assessment of the workplace.
Very often, managers want to get a highly qualified specialist for a certain vacancy, not realizing that, firstly, such data is not needed for this vacancy, he will quickly get bored. And the other danger is that, having gained experience in such a not very high vacancy, he will create a certain discomfort for his manager and his colleagues.
What is the assessment of the candidate?
Before moving on to the topic of technology and the method of conducting an interview, I would like to say a few words about what. The assessment of the candidate that takes place during the interview and the knowledge that we receive about him during the interview is extremely valuable. Because then, when he becomes our employee, this knowledge will help us to manage him correctly, to understand in which areas, at what work, he will be as effective as possible.
I want to focus on some factors of people's efficiency. According to Lee Ikoki, business is ultimately reduced to three concepts. These are people, profit, and product. People in this trilogy are the first. And if you do not have a reliable team, then with the other two factors it is unlikely that something can be done.
The company Panasonic has achieved outstanding results not only thanks to its technical achievements, but also thanks to special social technologies. Social technologies are primarily associated with the disclosure of human potential.
The managers of these companies believe that their main task is to create such working conditions for a person so that when he feels fully fulfilled at work, he would be really successful. And indeed, in such an environment, people show completely unique results of their work.
In other words, the key to the efficiency of the company and the efficiency of production is the ability to work with people. What I want to say is that we employ a person thanks to his professional skills and knowledge. And it seems that if he comes to the company, he must be necessarily effective.
In fact, this does not happen. It has a huge impact on how much he fits into the team, how much the environment in the company will allow him to realize his ambitions. Ambitions can be completely different. This is a desire for professional growth, a career, and independent decisions. It is quite possible that these will be encouragement, awards, and public recognition for some people. This is very important.
During the first stage of the interview, we already receive information about the person's main goals. And if the company, for example, cannot provide a person with professional growth and development, but wants a ready specialist, then it is unlikely that the candidate who says that the development of new technologies and products is the main thing for him, will not fit into the company.
If career growth is extremely important for a person, and he sees a challenge in this, and for him it is an interest and a desire, and in the company people work 5-7 years and it is impossible to become a manager faster, then no matter how professional a person is and no matter how interesting his knowledge and experience are, he will definitely not fit into the company.
Of course, it is impossible to understand all the factors that will affect a person's success in an interview, but some can be understood. I want to list these factors, because this is extremely important information, and we can understand something already at the stage of selecting a candidate.
Let's talk about the factors that affect a person's individual behavior and his successful activity in the company. The first and probably the most important factor is the ability to perform a specific job. Of course, all people have different abilities, and the task of a line manager is to determine these abilities and use them correctly.
When is it extremely important? For example, about the formation of working groups. Imagine that in the marketing department you need to form a working group to solve a task or to carry out a project. All specialists are marketologists, but you need to include a creative marketologist, an analyst who is able to work and analyze a large amount of information, and a person with a strategic vision who can describe the entire project in detail.
This is not an easy, but very important task of a line manager, namely to determine the abilities. The second factor that affects success is the predisposition to a certain activity. In fact, we are talking about the potential of an employee. When is it important? It is important when forming a personnel reserve.
Imagine that a specialist is going to learn management skills, and if a person does not have a predisposition to management, then time, money, and resources will be wasted in vain.
The third factor is the value orientation of a person. Of course, we are talking about what a person values, what is important to him in life, what paths he sees, what he is ready to accept and never step over. The most important factor of a person's success.
The interests of people. The interests of people act as an inciting mechanism for the development of a personality. They push a person to learn something new in his work, to master new technologies, to acquire new knowledge.
Expectations of people must be realized at work, otherwise the work will become uninteresting. The most powerful factor is both the activation of a person's activities and his suppression.
Taking into account the point of view of people's relationships, this factor is the basis of a person's corporate nature, his loyal attitude to his company, corporate culture.
The last factor is the satisfaction of needs. Of course, every company strives to create a symbiosis. When the interests, expectations, and needs of a person are satisfied, the company only wins.
We have understood what factors affect a person's success. In the interview, we try to understand how a company that is accepted by an employee can provide a candidate with the most comfortable conditions for his implementation and successful activity.
I want to draw your attention to the fact that when we make this assessment, we are not looking for an ideal candidate. We are looking for a candidate that is most suitable for us, our tasks, our structure, and for us personally, because we constantly interact with him.
There are no bad candidates or bad companies. There are candidates that simply do not fit this company and companies that do not fit the candidate.
We have come to the point of conducting an interview. When a candidate enters the line manager, he goes through two stages of the interview. The first is a general interview in the HR department. The second interview is always conducted in the HR department.
Before understanding the difference between an interview and a line manager, you need to understand what is the difference between an interview in HR, HR staff, and a line manager.
The first is that a person came to the HR department. What are the nuances? For a candidate, coming to the HR department, this is just a moment of an interview. His behavior within the company in the HR department can be fundamentally different.
The HR department can conduct only one interview, and the goal of this interview is to find out the candidate as well as possible, so that he can be successfully sold. The second point is not to replace the candidate.
A specialist in HR can have enough professional knowledge to evaluate a candidate, but you need to understand that this does not always happen. Here the reliability of this check is determined by the level of the agency with which you work.
After this, the candidate gets an interview with the HR manager already inside the company. There are several nuances. The HR manager certainly knows the whole situation in the company very well, unlike the HR department.
The manager knows the special requirements, the special atmosphere, and corporate culture. For him, in principle, there are no questions in terms of who he is looking for and why. But a specialist in HR in the company can not always conduct a professional assessment of the candidate, due to the fact that, as a rule, recruiters are engaged in a huge range of specialists, and they cannot know every area in detail in which they work.
A specialist in HR has several opportunities to evaluate a candidate, unlike HR, where it is traditionally not customary to conduct psychological or other tests. Inside the company, a person can be subjected to a polygraph, psychological, professional testing, security check, and a collection of recommendations. All this information is naturally collected by the HR manager.
And after this, if the candidate has successfully completed these interviews, the person gets an interview with the HR manager. Of course, the opportunity of the HR manager is immeasurable. He can meet with the candidate 2, 3, 5 times.
But, as a rule, the following happens. A huge number of current cases and tasks do not allow the HR manager to spend a lot of time on meeting with the candidate. This happens either very quickly or superficially, and he tries to make an assessment as quickly as possible, instead of spending an hour and a half on thoughtful and structured interviews.
Of course, a line manager, from a professional point of view, is better than anyone who can understand a person. But most likely, in the absence of experience in assessing personal characteristics, this assessment will not be complete and absolutely correct.
The behavior of the candidate also changes dramatically. One thing is the inevitable evil of the HR manager. The second thing is when you just need to skip the manager in the selection service. And the third thing is when you need to make the best impression on the line manager.
The candidate, I must tell you, can change dramatically from interview to interview.
It seems right if an HR agent who does not have complete information on the vacancy, personal requirements and corporate culture of the company, finds out all the external data from the candidate. What is included in this data?
Of course, the general information about the company in which the candidate works. This is the name, the type of business, the country, the city, the number of companies, the structure of the company. This is very important information to understand from which corporate culture the person came.
Very often, candidates hide information about the location of the company, in which city it was located. Experience acquired by a person in Vladivostok or Novosibirsk may be completely unnecessary in Moscow. They understand this perfectly and do not indicate this information in the resume. And this is important.
The second block of information that a HR specialist can find out is everything related to education. There are companies for which education is one of the most important characteristics of a candidate. And in this case, absolutely everything becomes important.
Daily or evening education? On-site or in-person? What is the average score of a person who graduated not only from the institute, but even from school? An additional education is an important point. Did the specialist study himself or was his additional education paid by the company?
It is important to understand what purpose he received this education. Was he sent to a higher school or institute to receive a second higher education? If a candidate has a degree in scientific development, invention, this can all be asked by an employee of a HR agency.
Of course, based on experience, even if a specialist does not have enough knowledge for professional assessment of a candidate, which happens quite often, he can still find out what projects the candidate had, what results he completed, what failures and successes there were.
Not to mention the place in the structure of his company, level of subordination, number of subordinates. These points are important because in further interviews, specialists can return to this topic again, clarify and check whether the candidate said everything correctly, did not mislead anyone.
A personal information of a specialist is an important part of the interview. It is believed, especially in the West, that it is not very convenient to ask questions about age and family status. Nevertheless, in Russian companies, this remains relevant. And very often, a question, if a person is not married, raises a certain confusion.
Therefore, an employee of a HR agency can easily find out this information in a rather delicate form.
An important topic is motivation. Motivation is the expected level of the candidate's income. And here you need to clarify absolutely everything. What does the candidate expect? Is it net salary or gross?
What currency is he considering his salary in? Is he waiting for a social package from the employer? Compliance with the labor code. Why is this important? Because now, in a situation of a shortage of specialists, candidates with this item of their CV are always misleading potential employers.
A person in a CV indicates one amount, then comes to an interview and indicates another. And when he comes to the final interview, if he is a successful candidate, he can name an amount three times more than the original one. Of course, this is a signal of inadequacy. But if you do not enter this data into the presentation from the HR agency, then it is impossible to understand how the situation in terms of salary changes.
Additional information is also important. The level of knowledge of foreign languages, which the HR agency can easily clarify. The level of knowledge of computers, special programs, and so on.
So, the specialist has gone through the interview at the HR agency. The HR agency has collected all the information I said and makes a small presentation, applies it to the CV. I must say that when the candidate goes from one stage of the interview to another, the CV must be transmitted without changes.
What is this related to? The CV is not just a source of formal information about the candidate. It is a reflection of his personality. The way the candidate tells about his work, what facts and figures he brings, can tell a lot about him.
A very short CV indicates that the candidate is not interested in looking for a job and placed his CV just to see if there will be any market reaction. Or the candidate, on the contrary, wrote his CV on five pages, telling about any trifle he did at work.
This is also a signal of how the candidate is able to assess some strategic things, how he sees the completeness of the project, how he sees the cause-and-effect relationship. Therefore, the CV, of course, is transferred with the candidate without changes.
So, the candidate gets to an interview with a HR specialist. We have already said that professional knowledge will not be checked. But what can the HR agency do? Of course, check the candidate's corporate culture, his personal characteristics, how stress-resistant he is, how self-motivated he is, how he can behave in unusual situations and conditions.
Of course, he can sell his vacancy professionally and tell about the company. These are all tasks of the HR agency. And after that, the candidate with two applications in his characteristics gets to the line manager.
The line manager is the most important link in the process of evaluating a candidate. Because it is the line manager who has to work with him, to be responsible for the quality of the candidate, to be responsible for how he will fit into the team, how loyal and corporate he will be.
Therefore, the line manager needs to be evaluated from all sides and understand how comfortable the manager will work with this person. But seeing the previous description characteristics, he can focus on the most important things – professionalism, personal coincidence and the ability to integrate the candidate into the department.
So, let's summarize. There is no technology that allows you to evaluate a candidate with 100% accuracy. This is the first point. The second point is that up to 90% of candidates mislead us in their CV, regarding education, experience and salary.
Therefore, in order to somehow increase the accuracy of the assessment, we divide all the information that we collect from the candidate into three parts – between the HR agency, between the HR manager and between the line manager. This gives us the opportunity to clarify and double-check the most important and most subtle points of the candidate's biography several times.
What is an interview?
So, we have come to the topic of conducting an interview.
An interview is a conversation between two or several people.
The goal of this conversation is only one – to get to know the candidate as much as possible.
To evaluate him from the point of view of whether he fits our vacancy or not.
Interviews have no other goal.
In order for an interview not to turn into a friendly conversation, the interviewer must listen for as long as possible, and the candidate must speak.
The time ratio of the candidate's conversation and the interviewer's conversation is 80 to 20.
This is a well-known rule.
It is believed that if the interviewer speaks more than 20% of the time, the interview is not conducted by him, but is conducted with him.
During the interview, we must determine the skills and experience of the candidate, the compliance of the vacancy, and understand his threats.
I really like the matrix that can be formulated as follows.
This is the candidate's matrix – wants, can, controls, safe.
If during the interview we get answers to all four questions – can the candidate do this job, does he really want to do this job, does he control the process of work,
and is he safe for the vacancy – these answers to these questions allow us to make a final and argumented decision on the candidate.
Yes, he fits us, no, he doesn't fit us.
I must tell you right away that if there is at least one no in this matrix, the candidate certainly does not fit us.
Because it is most likely that it is not necessary to talk about the possibility of accepting an unsafe or uncontrolled candidate for work.
So, let's analyze all categories in sequence.
The first, probably, the main category is related to the professional experience, skills and knowledge of the candidate.
This category is – can.
We determine how a candidate is able to perform the planned duties from the point of view of the existing competencies or acquired in the future.
I want to draw your attention to the fact that here we determine not only what a person already knows, but also his potential for learning, how much he can be taught to do this job.
For example, if he takes some additional courses, or a training center, or something else.
The category can includes experience, ability to learn, and success.
Why do I want to draw your attention to success?
Because very often a person has been doing a job, and maybe even for several years, but there have been no breakthroughs, no results, no success.
I will give a simple example. I had such a candidate.
An amazing resume, two foreign languages, and personal charisma.
For about six years, he was engaged in sales on the B2B market and sold complex equipment.
Everything was great for my client, he was candidate number one.
But when I began to find out in great detail what he was selling and with what success, it turned out that he had never sold anything during these years.
The reasons for the failure of sales were very clearly argued to them.
The first time it was super-new equipment, and the market was not ready at all.
The second time, it was super-expensive equipment, and the market was not ready to buy such equipment when there were a lot of cheap competitors.
The third time he got into a business that was turned down by the government, and again his sales were unsuccessful.
Of course, my client and I refused such a candidate.
Success is the most important indicator.
How can we determine all these three indicators?
Well, a person's experience is determined by direct questions related to his work.
For example, if we want to evaluate a sales manager, the most direct questions are asked.
Have you ever won new territory for yourself?
If you once opened a branch, please tell us how you did it.
How do you turn a random customer into a permanent one?
What is your database? What clients are your priority?
This is the first question.
The second is the ability to learn.
This is a slightly more difficult question, because you need to understand, in addition to what a person is capable of,
but does he have a desire to develop, expand his professional knowledge and gain new experience?
These questions can be somewhat different.
For example, tell us how you did it when you realized that you didn't have enough knowledge to solve the problem.
Or give us an example when you took on more responsibility than you had.
How did you do it? Why did you do it? What experience did you get from it?
And the success category is again based on the example of a sales manager.
Tell us how many clients were in your database when you joined the company?
How many clients did you have? How many active clients were in your database?
How much time did you need to create such a database?
Or maybe a question with a slightly more indirect sound.
Tell us about your most interesting project.
Tell us about the most successful.
Maybe about the most unsuccessful.
And about how a person will tell, with what intonation.
We can draw a conclusion as to how much he is ready to receive such, let's say, negative experience.
What conclusion does he draw from this? What lessons does he learn?
The category can be used very well with the help of the case interview technique.
What is it? Cases are the construction of certain tasks or situations.
When we offer a candidate to fantasize a little, how he would behave in a given situation.
There is a slightly different category of cases that test his professional skills.
Then he must tell how he behaves in this situation.
Of course, it is necessary to understand that when we give a candidate such a task,
then, of course, we hear socially desirable answers.
And even if he does not do so in life, answering our question,
he will try to tell how he would have behaved if he had the opportunity to replay everything.
Here we look at the emotional coloring of the solution to this task.
And yet, despite the fact that he gives a socially desirable answer,
there is a certain accuracy of this assessment.
All cases can be divided into three parts.
The first case is the one that tests the candidate's professional skills.
These are very simple cases related to solving tasks.
What can it be? For example, tell me, please,
how would you act if you had to open a branch in a foreign city?
And the candidate tells what is the algorithm for opening branches,
how would he act in a given situation.
Another question, for example, related to this.
Tell me, please, you have received a task to develop a marketing plan for a new product.
Please, what will you do?
These are professional cases, and we immediately see how the candidate reacts,
how quickly he reacts, how he gives several ways out of the situation.
We understand his professional knowledge, and variability of thinking,
and the speed of thinking, and readiness to solve complex tasks in an interview state.
This is still not a standard situation.
The second category of cases, I would say,
are cases related to assessing a person's personal values,
his certain priorities.
What can be the cases in this case?
Very simple. Let's put it this way.
We ask the candidate,
you found out that your colleague speaks ill of you.
This is very disturbing for you to work, and creates a bad atmosphere in the team.
Tell me, what will be your actions?
Or another case.
You found out that your colleague, not a subordinate, not a boss,
constantly commits unkind acts towards the company.
They do not hurt you in any way, but you know about it.
Tell me, how will you behave?
What can we understand from these cases?
Of course, the candidate's values.
On the one hand, he commits actions, like in the second case,
towards his colleague,
and it seems that the actions are bad,
but it is also traditionally unkind to knock.
And because the candidate will consider this situation,
what outcomes he will look for,
we will see his values, his decency,
his loyalty to the company, his priorities.
And another large group of cases,
which are well used when we assess the candidate's personal characteristics.
I should draw your attention to the fact that there are personal characteristics
that are strictly related to the category of can.
For example, for sellers, the ability to find a way out of conflict situations
is an absolutely professional skill.
The same as the ability to negotiate.
The same as stress resistance.
The same as the personality trait creativity,
absolutely necessary for a marketer.
For example, I will give you such cases,
which we define the ability of the candidate to find a way out of a difficult situation.
For example, you and your colleague, we say to the candidate,
come to a large presentation to your client.
A very important event,
and your colleague should hold the presentation.
Suddenly, before entering the client,
you know, I'm so nervous that I'm just not able to focus.
Your actions.
And we look at how our candidate will behave in this situation.
What will be the accents?
He will try to transfer the presentation.
He will try to persuade his colleague to gather him and help him to tune in to the presentation.
Or he will just take the situation on himself and say,
it's okay, I know what to talk about.
Because the main thing for him will be the goal.
Here we will see, in addition to stress resistance and the ability to find a way out of a difficult situation,
we will also see such a characteristic as a desire to achieve the goal.
There is a slightly different situation.
For example, you came to a foreign city.
Also such a case, probably even interesting.
You came to a foreign city, go to a conference,
you find out that you have neither documents nor money, nothing at all.
Your actions.
How will you act?
Sometimes when I have to interview personal assistants to the first persons of the company,
I ask such a question and it turns out that, in general, very often personal assistants are lost.
The question is very simple.
Imagine that for a long time, for example, a week,
you agreed to meet your boss with a very high official, for example, a deputy minister.
The meeting is very important and you know about it.
And on the day when the meeting is to take place, your boss leaves the office an hour later.
It is quite clear that he is late.
Your actions.
And you can imagine that there are personal assistants who rush to protect their boss,
tell him that the plane has just arrived, the weather conditions did not allow him to arrive earlier.
And there are personal assistants who say that they will call, apologize,
ask to cancel the meeting and somehow try to adjust to the high official to whom their boss is going.
Different characteristics.
Such a simple case.
I should draw your attention to the fact that if with the help of cases we check non-professional knowledge,
when a person should think, concentrate, weigh and say,
and check stress and stability, the ability to get out of conflict situations,
certain reactivity, quick decision-making, then we should hurry the candidate.
Not just sit and listen when he comes up with and tells us a case,
but constantly adjust it and say further, and then, and why, and why.
This creates some artificial stress,
but it will allow us to better understand how a person really has such characteristics.
So, we have disassembled the category of can.
Now let's move on to the category of wants.
What is wants?
This is how motivated the candidate is to perform the proposed work,
and most importantly, why he wants to work in this particular company.
What questions can we ask to understand how motivated the candidate is to perform the work?
Of course, the question is what prospects do you see for yourself in our company or on our vacancy?
Why did you decide to consider this vacancy?
Are there any questions about it?
I want to draw your attention to the fact that asking such a question,
and whether the candidate has a question on the proposed vacancy, is necessary.
Because if the candidate has no questions, and he has already come to the interview,
then most likely the candidate is not interested in this vacancy of the company,
and he just wants to leave his current job.
Agree, this is absolutely not the same.
An important question is what your current employer could do
so that you do not leave the company, so that you stay.
Today, an important question must be asked,
especially since the situation of counter-offers,
when the candidate goes through all the interviews, receives an offer in the company,
returns to his employer and says,
I received such and such an offer, but you can leave me, increasing my salary.
Today the situation is just typical.
Although a year ago, this was very rare,
and was considered as an improper behavior of the candidate.
A good question is what else do you not like in your last job?
A traditional question is why do you want to leave your company?
Or a question based on previous experience, why did you leave your company?
It is best, of course, to ask the question,
what interested you in a new company and in a new job?
The category wants to check very well with design methods.
We will dwell on them in more detail.
This is a good technique,
because the candidate is asked to assess an abstract situation that is not related to him.
I remind you that if in the case he decides the situation,
being inside the situation, as an active person,
he tells about his possible actions,
then in design technique he assesses and says in general.
An example of a design question.
Tell me, please, why do people make a career?
Or why do not specialists steal?
A good question is why do people continue to work actively
when their boss leaves for a business trip or vacation?
A person does not talk about himself, he talks about other people.
At the same time, he relaxes and becomes more open.
Of course, design technique gives a lower probability of socially desirable response.
When using design techniques,
it is necessary to remember that the key thing when we assess the candidate's response
is his emotional color of the response.
Just like in the case, we must ask the candidate to answer faster
and give several options for answers.
In the case when he talks about other people, this is not very difficult.
When are design techniques used?
Certainly, in the assessment of the true motivators of the candidate.
Of course, material and non-material motivation is important.
The second point is the attitude of the leader and the employee.
All questions related to what the leader should be,
what a great employee should be,
what should be the company of your dream.
This works very well when we understand
how much the candidate's expectations can be realized in our company.
Of course, the value system, which I have already mentioned.
Why employees do not steal, why they work honestly.
Let's look at the true motivators of the candidate.
This is a very important point, and we need to understand
how much a person corresponds to our corporate culture,
how much he is ready to correspond to it,
and what is important for him.
What is hidden behind the words I want a new job, I want a white salary, or something else?
I will give you a few examples.
We ask the candidate a question.
Please tell me what is the most important thing for an employee in work.
Why does a person work diligently?
Why does he strive to work successfully and for a long time in the company?
Maybe a few questions, they can be formulated in several ways.
And we hear the following answer from the candidate.
A person works effectively in a company when he has clear goals.
What does this mean?
This means that if an employee does not see a clear goal,
and he has a blurred area of responsibility,
then most likely he will not be effective.
When we understand such a feature of an employee,
we need to know that it is very important for him to set clear goals,
to set check point,
and to make him report at certain moments,
and he must see the ultimate goal of his work.
Maybe another answer is heard.
When a person works effectively,
then when work is interesting for him.
An interesting signal, because it is not clear
what a person means when he says the word interesting work.
It is necessary to clarify.
If for a person creative work, interest is really important,
then it is necessary to understand that it is not suitable for routine work.
This specialist should be used in creative projects.
Routine will just suck him in and he will lose instant interest.
I had such an example of a candidate who came to work in a large holding,
and he really wanted to work there.
He wanted so much that after receiving a task from the company
to develop a case in order to try to take a vacation,
he did not sleep all night and at 8 am he stood at the door of the holding
with the completed task and waited for the manager who passed by him
and said, oh, you have already made a case.
He got into this company, for about six months he worked 12 hours a day,
building his department.
After that, the department was built, the connections were established,
there was a great structure of interchange.
And how did it all end?
This specialist is of a very high level, well-educated,
but extremely creative, just bored.
And when I talked to him, he spoke quite frankly.
My working day ends at 5 pm.
Until 8 pm, when it is convenient for the manager of my level to leave work,
I read books, sit on the Internet and do not know what to do.
Complete loss of interest.
Of course, for his senior manager, this is a task.
Such a specialist needs to be used in complex, interesting projects
that would be a challenge for him,
and where he could really fully implement his non-standard approaches
and skills.
Often we hear in interviews, when we ask the question,
what do you want from a new job,
people talk about independence, responsibility, some powers.
Of course, for these people, it is necessary to understand
that after a while they will need a career step.
It may not be very high,
but, for example, a specialist will become a leading specialist,
a leading specialist will become the head of the group.
So when we talk and ask such a neutral, seemingly, question,
why do people work effectively and what motivates them,
we get very serious, deep motives of the candidate,
why he himself wants to work and what is important for him in his work.
Analysis of the true motivation of the candidate
is important not only at the time of the acceptance of the candidate for work
and for understanding his entry into corporate culture,
but, as I said, this is extremely important information
for the management of the candidate in the future,
when he becomes a company employee.
The third point of our matrix is controllability.
A fairly complex category,
which is difficult to understand and difficult to determine.
What is controllability?
It is the readiness of the candidate to follow the rules, regulations,
the regulations adopted in the company.
And additionally, it is enough for the candidate to develop self-criticism,
the ability to admit his mistakes, to learn lessons.
How to determine the controllability of the candidate?
Direct questions, how you did it,
most likely it is very difficult.
To determine the controllability,
we will use a new technique called behavioral questions.
Or in other sources, such questions are called competence interviews.
What is this technology?
Here we ask a person a question about his experience,
but not just tell me and that's it.
We start to dig very deeply into the situation.
If we say, please tell us your actions,
with which you managed to implement the idea,
with which your manager disagreed,
then we do not just let go of the situation,
the candidate tells us how he managed to implement this idea,
but we ask clarifying questions.
How did you understand that your manager disagreed?
What do you think, why did he disagree?
What attempts did you make to convince him and to incline him to your side?
Of course, by the way a person tells how he got out of this situation,
how he negotiated with his manager,
how he defended his plan, project,
we understand how controllable this person is.
Very often there are cases when a candidate says that
I offered him 1, 2 and 3,
I proved the correctness of my plan,
my manager disagreed, I wrote a resignation letter.
Of course, this is not a very good characteristic of the candidate's controllability.
Good questions on controllability are related to the work discipline.
How much a person will be ready to accept the rules of the discipline adopted in the company.
If in the company, traditionally, all training programs are held in the off-work hours,
then it is necessary to find out how a person will treat the fact that he will study in the off-work hours.
And you need to ask this several times,
so that he does not give a socially desirable answer,
yes, of course, he treats it perfectly.
A simple question with business trips.
We know that on the vacancy, on which we are looking for candidates,
a person will spend 70% of the time on business trips.
And, accordingly, the question to the candidate,
what do you think about business trips?
He will answer, I treat it normally.
But we need to understand that he is not just treating them normally,
but that the candidate wants to go on these business trips,
that this is an interest for him, a challenge for him.
He sees in this the possibility of his development,
he finds new connections,
contacts, expands both the professional sphere and the sphere of some personal interests.
Therefore, of course, such questions related to controllability,
they are not very simple.
As I said at the beginning of my story,
there is such a trick, tell about yourself for 10 minutes,
and 80% of the candidates will not be silent in 10 minutes.
There is another trick, tell about yourself in categories,
there was a situation, you held an event,
got some results.
We give the candidate a statement that we are interested in the story,
in such categories.
Surprisingly, a huge number of candidates pretend that they do not hear these statements.
Accordingly, it is difficult to talk about their controllability.
A good question to clarify the controllability is,
how do you think, are you successful?
Let's say, a sales manager, a topic close to me.
Are you a successful seller?
And listen carefully to what the candidate tells us.
What signals of danger can cause our tension here?
The candidate only says that he decided so.
I think so, I am sure of it, I see my results.
If he says all the time that he is confident in his success,
because this is his knowledge,
then this is a signal that this candidate is not very controllable.
And the last category in our matrix,
wants, can, is controlled, is safe, is security.
The last in line, but not the last in significance.
Especially today, when alcoholism and drug addiction have become the reality of our day.
Determining security is a complex and extremely important thing when evaluating a candidate.
What is security?
This is the ability to solve problems with the candidate
in a conflict situation in the system of employee-employee.
And also, how much the future employee can control his actions, speech,
that is, what we usually call his adequacy.
Before talking about how to determine the security of the candidate in an interview,
you need to look at what signs of an unsafe candidate may be.
The first sign is that the candidate comes to the company with his database
and considers it a serious competitive advantage.
You need to understand that after some time,
having worked in your company, if you have taken such a candidate,
he will go to a new employer with a new database.
Of course, in an interview, the candidate is always respected.
For example, I suggest that you go to a competing company,
they answer as follows.
You know, they say, I worked very well in my company.
I know all its pros and cons.
And everything was going well.
The fact that I want to move does not mean that I want to damage my company.
This, of course, always causes respect and trust for such a candidate.
In addition, I always warn my clients who ask to find them specialists from competing companies.
Simple questions that I ask.
Please tell me, if this person leaves his company and goes to you,
what motive does he have, except for a very high salary that you offer him?
And what can he do tomorrow in your company?
And where will he go with your database?
Therefore, the question of the database is very serious,
which requires special attention when interviewing with a candidate.
The second point.
The candidate does not respond well to his employer.
Of course, it is very difficult to talk about a company in good words,
where an unnormative lexicon was adopted,
where the manager allowed himself, for example, to throw ashtrays at his subordinates,
or where there is an official six-day working week.
This, by the way, exists today.
But it all depends on how the candidate talks about it,
how he behaves and what assessment he gives to what is happening.
Another alarming signal of an unsafe candidate
is the discovery of completely commercial information about the company.
Without asking questions, he suddenly begins to talk about the fact that
the company has been rejected, how much they are being done and to whom.
He talks about the people interested in a company,
about projects that may have been asked by clients and not to name.
This is always a serious signal of the danger of the candidate.
Of course, information that the company has adopted a gray form of payment
is also not a very good signal.
Another signal that I would like to mention is
if a candidate suddenly says that he is ready to leave his current job
and move to a new one within two days.
Of course, the question arises, what kind of specialist is he,
who can really leave his job within two days?
What kind of project is he leading?
And what is the situation in the company when this can happen?
Most likely, this person either no longer works
and just talks about being in the company,
or he is already in the dismissal stage,
and he really ends his work.
We definitely do not conclude that this candidate is dangerous and does not suit us.
But of course, this is a topic for discussion.
Another topic that must always be clarified is
if a candidate suddenly agrees to a sharp reduction in his position or salary.
For example, a person was a manager of a sales department or a commercial director,
and suddenly he agrees to the position of key account manager.
There can be completely objective reasons.
For example, a person came from the region to Moscow
and, of course, it is not very correct and almost impossible to count on the same high position as he had there.
And then a person chooses such a path for himself
that he goes to the company for a lower position,
but he absolutely understands that after a while,
with his hard work and implemented projects, he will prove his worth.
Such people are visible right away, they talk about it.
Or, for example, a person was a commercial director in a small structure,
and he goes to a very large structure with a reduction.
Then you can also understand that the experience of a small business and the experience of a large business are completely different things.
And his motivation for transition is clear.
If there is no such motivation, this is a topic to be surprised.
Why, all of a sudden, what did not work out in the company?
What are the reasons? What are the problems? What are the conflicts that force a person to do so?
Of course, the point I was already talking about is an inadequate increase in salary compared to what is indicated in the resume.
We read the resume and see that a person is considering a salary of, for example, 3 thousand.
He comes to our interview and suddenly calls 5.
In this case, I always ask a very simple question, especially if the resume is not relevant, for example, 2 or 3 months ago.
I ask my candidates a question.
Please tell me what happened in your life that your market value has increased so much?
You received a super education, you participated in an incredibly complex and interesting project.
What happened to you?
The way a person reacts to my question and how he responds is a signal of his adequacy and correct perception of reality.
Another source of information about a candidate, as we all know, is a collection of recommendations.
So, if a candidate blocks the receipt of recommendations in every possible way,
motivating him not to want the information that he is looking for a job to go to the market, this is also a signal of tension.
Of course, we do not collect information and recommendations about a person who works in his current company.
Of course, this is not ethical and you do not need to create problems for the candidate.
But why can't you get his recommendations from the previous job?
It is completely incomprehensible.
Of course, we know that if a candidate indicates recommendations in a resume or calls them during an interview,
then, most likely, these are the recommendations with which a certain agreement has been reached.
It must be said that now there is such a practice.
If a candidate is very unsuccessful and a conflict has occurred, or he has not passed the probation period, or something else has happened,
and the company does not want to have problems with this candidate or does not have the formal ability to fire him,
then there is such an agreement.
The candidate does not demand from the company any gold parachute, no compensation, nothing.
He leaves peacefully, despite the fact that there was a conflict.
The company, on its part, gives him good recommendations.
As a rule, they are written.
But we understand that written recommendations still make sense to recheck.
The resume of this moment is that you should pay attention to how a person treats the ability to give recommendations.
Sometimes we ask them, even realizing that we will not call these recommenders, because the candidate is quite transparent.
But the readiness of a person to call these people, the openness of information, the evidence that, in principle, he has nothing to be afraid of.
So, having determined all the signs of an unsafe candidate, the question arises, how can we understand this during an interview,
if these are the signs that I just mentioned, still no.
We need to talk.
Two techniques work very well here.
The first is provocative questions.
And the second is the stress interview technique.
I will say right away about the stress interview, because the usual maximum number of questions on evaluation techniques is related to the stress interview.
For ethical reasons, a stress interview is an extreme measure that should not be carried out for no reason, without serious grounds.
Of course, if the candidate works in a very unfavorable environment, sometimes in another country, or in a state of strong psychological pressure,
then a test at the stage of the stress interview can be useful.
But you can't use this technology without knowing how to.
The peculiarity of the correct stress technology is when the candidate is prepared for it.
Therefore, if there is a need to check his stress resistance, then you need to warn him that you will use the stress interview.
You need to warn him on what day and say whether you agree with this evaluation technology.
And after conducting a stress interview, the person needs to relax, thank him for agreeing to this procedure,
that he was brave, that everything was fine, and that you had no personal complaints.
You didn't want to offend or insult him in any way.
Therefore, stress interviews should be conducted only in the most extreme cases when other evaluation technologies simply do not work.
What can be attributed to stress issues?
It is not necessary to personally insult a person.
Most likely, this is an unacceptable thing, but it is often used.
You can ask absolutely unpleasant work questions.
Again, from the same database.
The question is, why are you sitting here with your database and not going to your competitors?
This is a rather unpleasant question.
Probably, this is not quite stress, but nevertheless.
Or such a question.
The whole market is working on rollbacks, and you want to say that you are not working?
Well, tell me, tell me.
Such a question is more personal.
You know, we have 15 excellent candidates on our vacancy.
Why did you decide that you have a chance to get this position?
Unpleasant questions.
When we ask a candidate, if the candidate is adequate and safe, then most likely the reaction will be absolutely adequate.
A person will either try to answer normally, he will not rush to shout, he will not insult each other,
do not knock on the door, do not demand any compensation.
Most likely, this will be a normal, healthy reaction.
It is good if a person can joke and somehow play this situation.
But, of course, you should not expect such a reaction.
A much softer and probably a little less effective technique to determine a safe candidate is provocative questions.
When a person, on the one hand, wants to show himself on the bright side and hide some things,
and on the other hand, he understands that if he starts to draw a little, it will be insincere and also quite obvious.
Therefore, provocative questions can be as follows.
For example, do you consider a service romance permissible?
Again, the question I asked, why do not the employees steal?
What serious failures at work happened to you?
Explain their reasons and how you got into them.
Also, questions to determine the safety of the candidate.
For example, such a property.
Please tell me, are you an example for yourself?
Who are your role models?
Is it profitable to be in good relations with your colleagues or just with people?
Tell me, what could your employees accuse you of?
Not very comfortable questions that require a certain approach, disclosure and courage to answer these questions.
So, we have analyzed all four categories of the matrix.
Want, can, safe, manage.
How do we draw a conclusion about the candidate?
The conclusion will be much easier if we structure all the information we have.
It can be structured in the form of a table, in the form of some points.
For example, I give two forms, this is for the choice, and everyone determines for himself how it is convenient for him to draw conclusions on the interview.
Maybe a summary of the candidates' table, which will include strong sides, weak sides, the possibilities of the candidate and threats.
Under each item, it is signed what we understood about the candidate.
If we work on the matrix, want, can, manage, safe, then this is the same table in which we write down why the candidate wants, what he can, manage and safe.
Once again, I want to draw your attention to the fact that at least one is not, and the candidate does not suit us.
But if we put the interview results in the table and argue each decision, then at the end we have a very clear assessment of the candidate.
For example, the candidate does not fit because he does not have enough motivation.
We talk about the category wants and write that the only motivation of the candidate is to get a white salary.
This is clearly not enough for a person to be hired.
Or, for example, the category can. We write that the candidate does not fit because he has no experience of successful sales, or, in principle, his sales experience is not enough to solve our tasks.
We do not manage. Again, the argument is that he left the previous job because he had continuous conflicts with his boss and he could not agree.
And it is safe, respectively, that the candidate is not safe because he came from his database and he has a very frequent change of work.
He does not work in one place for more than one year.
Naturally, filling in this table, we think over the results of our interview.
We get an absolutely logical, structured and justified answer.
If the candidate suits us, we can always say why.
If the candidate does not suit us, we say exactly why he does not fit and give feedback to the staff for another search, for a corrector.
So, I want to summarize what we get.
Each interview that we conduct with a candidate must be prepared and structured.
In this case, it is very easy to evaluate the candidate and compare several candidates to the same position.
If we ask questions that fit into the system of whether we want to manage it or not, we will not ask questions that do not bring us any information load or that we simply cannot interpret.
I will give you some examples. Sometimes we ask a question that we think will show the intellectual level of the candidate.
And we say to him, please tell me what you read.
And the candidate answers us, I read Spanish literature.
Or, because of a lack of time, I read books in English.
Please tell us what this gives us to determine his professional skills or to determine his safety.
Therefore, when interviewing a candidate, you need to prepare.
Traditionally, it is believed that you need to ask 20 key questions and 2-3 clarifying questions for each question.
The time it takes to answer these 20 questions will take up to 1.5 hours.
But at the end of the interview, we get very clear information.
I have a suggestion that can be designed as follows.
A table of three columns.
In the first column, we describe the characteristics that we want to understand from the candidate.
For example, the category can.
We learn professional experience, results, achievements, projects, and also those personal qualities that are included in this characteristic.
Ability to negotiate, convincing communication, independence, determination, and so on.
The second part is all the characteristics that belong to the category wants.
These are true motivators.
This is readiness to work in a team, to work in this company, to accept its cultural values, and so on.
Manageability and safety are what we have already talked about.
Manageability, for example, for a company, readiness for overtime work.
This is also managability, how much a person is ready to accept this system.
Readiness to fly on a business trip, to study in a short time, and so on.
And safety.
His adequate behavior during an interview, his reaction to provocative questions.
We got this.
In the second column, near each question, we make short notes on the candidate's answer.
First, we will not forget this at the end of the interview or the next day.
Secondly, this will give us an understanding of his compliance with what we require.
And in the third column, when we analyze the interview, we put the scores.
The scores can be in a system that is convenient for you.
For some, it is convenient from minus 2, it is very bad, up to plus 2 is very good.
For some, a 5-point system is convenient, adopted at school.
For some, a 10-point system is convenient.
The system is variable, but whatever the assessment system we adopted,
at the end of our table, we will definitely get a certain numerical answer.
And if we have 3, 4 or 5 candidates for this vacancy,
then we can easily compare the numerical answers,
understand which candidate is the best for us.
And the task for us is to find the best, the most suitable,
the most consistent with our requirements and our vacancy.
Thank you for your attention.
I wish you success in such a difficult matter as selection and assessment of staff.
And I really hope that only the most suitable, the most suitable and the most correct employees will work in your company.